So we played around with Node.js a bit and we saw one of its built-in core modules which you can pull in to
add certain functionalities which are not available in the browser but which are available in Node.js.
One important difference compared to the browser of course is that some modules need to be imported
with this syntax in order to use them whilst others are available globally and most modules actually
need to be imported by the way, in the browser
all the things by default are available globally,
you can just access documents like this,
you can just access local storage like this.
That's one difference, in Node.js,
it's more of you have to tell me what you need approach, other than that
however, it's highly comparable,
we have the same base language and then some specific APIs.
Now let's move away from this dummy script here,
I'll name it files.js and add a new app.js which is empty and let's see what we can do in Node.js
when it comes to working with HttpRequests because that arguably is an important scenario where you
would look to Node.js running a web server with it.
So let's see how that would work.
It all starts with a specific module
you can require and that's the HTTP module,
it's a module that allows you to work with HttpRequests This by the way does not just mean that you
can listen to them,
you can also create a request and send it to a server but more commonly, you use Node.js to set up a
server that listens to incoming requests so that you can have your own web server and in the end by
the way, that's also what the webpack
dev server and all these other development servers do, they use Node.js to set up a basic web server
which runs locally on your system to host your HTML files, your simple local web application.
Now we'll basically do the same here but we'll not just build our own development server but instead
we'll build a server which also runs some server-side logic, something
development servers of course don't do, they just serve our local files. Now to get started with that,
we need to create a server and for that on the HTTP method,
we can call create server. The create server method does just what it sounds like and it requires one important
argument for that,
a request listener,
this is a function which in the end triggers for every incoming request.
This request listener function takes two arguments which are passed in automatically by Node.js and
that's a request object and a response object.
So this will basically be passed in by Node.js and will reflect the request which was coming in, so
the headers which are part of the request, the data which might be part of the request and so on and this
response object is also given to you by Node.js, it's an object which you can then use to configure
the response you want to send back and to then ultimately send it back.
So inside here of
create server, we can now work with these two pieces to read data from the incoming request and to send
back a response and to start
very simple, let's start with the response object to right now do nothing with the incoming request but
to just send back a response and there we can call write, to write some data to the response,
for example a simple string where we say hello there and then we can call end which will send the response,
so end basically tells Node.js we're done adding data to the response,
you can now close it and send it back
and this is a very simple web server
we could build with Node.js.
Now with the server created, we need to do one more thing though, we need to call listen on it,
so we either chain this here or we take the extra step of storing this in a separate constant and then
we call listen on this constant, so on the object, on the server object stored in the constant. Listen is
required to then actually start the server,
you can think of create server as a method to build the server but then listen starts it up and listens
to incoming requests.
Listen also takes the port on which you want to listen
and here I'll go for 3000 for my local development only to use this special port locally here.
With that if we now save this, we can again run our app.js file which now holds the server and you
will notice something interesting. If I do that, we don't get an error
but we also don't complete this process, my cursor here in the terminal is stuck.
Now you can always quit this by hitting control c but it is stuck for a good reason, it is stuck because
this is an ongoing process,
this script now doesn't finish
once all the lines have been parsed, instead listen in the end sets up an ongoing event listener you could
say behind the scenes which waits for incoming requests
and as long as Node.js notices ongoing event listeners, it does not shut down script execution which
is why this script execution is still going on, because we have ongoing event listeners and that's of
course what you want,
you want your server to keep on running and not to quit after it was configured, right?
So now we get this ongoing server and to see it in action,
all we have to do is we have to visit localhost:3000 and there, you should see hello
there on this page. You see hello there there because that's of course the data we are sending
back in the simple response.
It's not HTML data or anything like that,
IT's a simple text but we see it here on our own
Node.js server and now we're back in the browser
but this is now not browser side Javascript,
in the end this is the result of server side Javascript which spins up a server and sends back a response.